add tutorial: get shell to node (#90)
gardener/documentation: website/documentation/050-tutorials/content/howto/shell-to-node/_index.md

  volumes:
  - name: host-root-volume
    hostPath:
      path: /
  hostNetwork: true
  hostPID: true
  restartPolicy: Never
```

Alternatively, you can use the [Gardener ops-toolbelt](https://github.com/gardener/ops-toolbelt) that has an image and a [script to set up the root pod](https://github.com/gardener/ops-toolbelt/blob/master/hacks/ops-pod) on the target node.
The ops-toolbelt image also comes with a [bunch of tools](https://github.com/gardener/ops-toolbelt/tree/master/dockerfile-configs) that can help with troubleshooting.

The easiest way is to use the script `ops-pod` in the `hacks` folder and supplying the node name as an argument:
```
<path-to-ops-toolbelt-repo>/hacks/ops-pod <target-node>
```

<h2> Use the Gardener Dashboard </h2> 

**Prerequisite**: the terminal feature is configured for the Gardener dashboard.

Navigate to the Cluster overview page and find the `Terminal` in the Access tile.
![f3ef5f0495992743d5d56d1f0adcd0ab.png](_resources/9fb6ca4ff9b7480f93debba833f48590.png)

Select the target Cluster (Garden, Seed/ ControlPlane, Shoot cluster) depending on the requirements and access rights (onyl certain users have access to the Seed ControlPlane).

> To open the terminal configuration, click on the top right-hand corner of the screen.

Author: I think right-hand corner is the more idiomatic way of expressing it, as `right` could also mean `correct`.

The dashboard then schedules a pod with the specifiied configurations and opens a shell session to the node.

To get access to common binaries installed on the host - prefix command with "chroot /hostroot" (the path depends on where the root pasth is mounted in the container. For the ops-toolbelt image it is under /hostroot) 

![0df1cc43eeafd164bfed1e47ea333487.png](_resources/3da659e9cc4744a2ad3e1c6a50d39c04.png)

# Node fails to join the Cluster

Kubernetes means cannot be used to troubleshoot a node that fails to join the cluster.
Additionally, Gardener typically provisions the CloudProvider instances to be in a private subnet of the VPC - hence have no public IP address that could be used for direct SSH access.

For this scenario, CloudProvider typically have extensive documentation (e.g [AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AccessingInstances.html) & [GCP](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instances/connecting-to-instance) and in [some cases tooling support](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instances/connecting-advanced#vpn)). 
However, these approaches are mostly CloudProvider specific and require interaction via the CloudProvider CLI or API. 

> Instead you can use `gardenctl` that provides out-of-the-box support to ssh into an instance in a private subnet for all major Cloud Providers.

Author: Have not seen one, I will just name the supported ones at the time of writing.

## Identifying the problematic instance
Firstly we need to pinpoint which instance is having problems. In Gardener, worker pools can be created in different CloudProvider regions, zones and accounts. So identifying the problematic instance via the CloudProvider is the first stepping-stone. 
Even though having identified the correct CLoudProvider region and account of the Shoot Cluster, the instance would typically show up as sucessfully started / running in the CloudProvider dashboard / API - so it is not immediately obvious which instance has a problem.

Instead we can use the Gardener API / CRDs to obtain the instance identifier in a Cloud-agnostic way.
Gardener uses the [Machine Controller Manager](https://github.com/gardener/machine-controller-manager) to create the Shoot worker nodes. 
For each worker node, the Machine Controller Manager creates a `Machine` CRD in the Shoot namespace in the respective Seed cluster. 
Usually the problematic instance can be identified as the respective `Machine` CRD is `pending`.
The `Machine` already contains the instance / node name in the .status, obtain it via:

> `k get machine <machine-name> -o json | jq -r .status.node`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
$ k get machine <machine-name> -o json | jq -r .status.node
```
```

for some reason gh does not render this suggestion right. I mean use the multi-line code snippet formatting here (tripple backquotes on new line)

> `k get machine <machine-name> -o json | jq -r .status.node`

Author: Thanks, taken straight from my local setup 👎

> This is all the information needed to go ahead and use `gardenctl ssh` to get a shell to the node (you can skip to the section [Gardenctl ssh](#gardenctl-ssh) below). 

Reviewer: The additional info below sounds interesting . why prompt to leave?
What may be necessary is to explain why would one need to do that?
For example, "To get additional details about the instance from the cloud provider, ..." or something like this.

Additionally we can identify the Cloud Provider, the Cloud Provider specific identfier of the instance and the region via: 

> `
> k get machine <machine-name> -o json | jq -r .spec.providerID // e.g aws:///eu-north-1/i-069733c435bdb4640
> `

Reviewer: suggestion formatting messed up again. I mean a multi-line code snippet again here (triple back-quotes on new line).
```suggestion
```
$ k get machine <machine-name> -o json | jq -r .spec.providerID // e.g aws:///eu-north-1/i-069733c435bdb4640
```
```

In this case: Cloud Provider `aws` with the ec2 instance-id `i-069733c435bdb4640` in region `eu-north-1`.
Additonal information about the instance can be found in the associated `<AWS/GCP/..>MachineClass` and can be obtained via the Cloud Provider specific dashboard & CLI.

> ## Gardenctl ssh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## gardenctl ssh
```

> Using the node name of the problematic instance, we can use the `gardenctl ssh` command to get a shell to the Cloud Provider instance via an automatically set up bastion.

Reviewer: is `bastion` common knowledge?

> The steps that `gardenctl` performs for each Cloud Provider [can be found here]( https://github.com/gardener/gardenctl/blob/10a537942b94234914758c0f6d053dc1cf218ecd/pkg/cmd/ssh_aws.go#L53-L52).

Reviewer: is that necessary information?

> Use the following commands:

Reviewer: Same comment as for using gadenctl with an operational node - split and consider adding a few words to lower the entry level particularly as far as gardenctl is concerned.

```
gardenctl target garden <target-garden>

gardenctl target shoot <target-shoot>

gardenctl ssh <target-node>
```

After waiting for the successful set-up of the bastion, this should open a shell on the target instance.

> ## Ssh via manually created Bastion (AWS)

Reviewer: Either stick to title case consistently or keep in lower case, i.e. bastion needs not be capitalized.
```suggestion
## SSH Via Manually Created Bastion (AWS)
```

In case you are not using `gardenctl` or want to control the bastion instance yourself, you can manually set-up the bastion. 
The steps described here are generally the same as when using `gardenctl`.

> The setup of a bastion host are different from Provider to Provider but generally involves the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The setup of a bastion host is different from Provider to Provider, but generally involves the following steps:
```

> The setup of a bastion host are different from Provider to Provider but generally involves the following steps:

Reviewer: Isn't that contradicting with the previous sentence?

- Open port 22 on the problematic instance.
- Create an instance / VM in a public subnet (bastion instance needs to have public ip adress).  
- Set-up security groups, roles and open port 22 for the bastion instance.

> The following demonstrated the setup of a bastion on AWS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following demonstrates the setup of a bastion on AWS.
```

> The following demonstrated the setup of a bastion on AWS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following demonstrates the setup of a bastion on AWS.
```

> **Prerequisites:**

Reviewer: having aws cli setup is a prerequisite too, no?

- Obtain target instance-id (see [here](#identifying-the-problematic-instance))

> - Obtain the VPC ID of the Shoot

Reviewer: some hints maybe?

- Make sure that port 22 on the target instance is open (default for Gardener deployed instances)
    - Extract security group via `aws ec2 describe-instances --instance-ids <instance-id>`
    - Check for rule that allows inbound connections on port 22 via `aws ec2 describe-security-groups --group-ids=<security-group-id>`

>     - If not available create via: `aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --group-id <security-group-id>  --protocol tcp --port 22 --cidr 0.0.0.0/0` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If not available, create with: `$ aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --group-id <security-group-id>  --protocol tcp --port 22 --cidr 0.0.0.0/0` 
```

> ### Create the Bastion security group

Reviewer: title case: 
```suggestion
### Create the Bastion Security Group
```

Reviewer: Consider using list formatting for this section. It's a step by step guide and using newlines you format it close to list anyway. The trick with lists when you provide more than one sentence per bullet, but a paragraph is to use tripple spaces and no blank lines. That binds together sentences in a section even if they do not belong to the same paragraph. See if that works for you or not.

The common name of the security group is `<shoot-name>-bsg`. Create the security group via:

`aws ec2 create-security-group --group-name <bastion-security-group-name>  --description ssh-access --vpc-id <VPC-ID>`

> Optionally create identifying tags for the security group:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optionally, create identifying tags for the security group:
```

To troubleshoot certain problems in a Kubernetes cluster, operators need access to the host of the Kubernetes node to troubleshoot 
problems. This can be required if a node misbehaves or fails to join the cluster in the first place.
With ssh access to the host, it is for instance possible to check the `kubelet` logs and interact with common tools such as `systemctl`and `journalctl`.

The first section of this guide explores options to get a shell to the node of a Gardener Kubernetes cluster. 
The options described in the second section do not rely on Kubernetes capabilities to get shell access to a node and thus can also be used if an instance failed to join the cluster.
This guide only covers how to get access to the host, but does not cover troubleshooting methods.

- [Shell access to an operational cluster node](#ssh-access-to-an-operational-cluster-node)
  - [Gardener Dashboard](#gardener-dashboard) 
  - [gardenctl shell](#gardenctl-shell) 
  - [Gardener Ops Toolbelt](#gardener-ops-toolbelt)
  - [Custom root pod](#custom-root-pod)
- [SSH access to a node that failed to join the cluster](#ssh-access-to-a-node-that-failed-to-join-the-cluster)
 - [gardenctl-ssh](#gardenctl-ssh) 

>  - [SSH using a manually created Bastion on AWS](#ssh-using-a-manually-created-bastion-aws) 

Reviewer: The last TOC link doesn't work. Inspecting the id for the heading HTML element shows that it's bit strangely constructed. No idea how come.. But the working id is the one below:
```suggestion
 - [SSH using a manually created Bastion on AWS](#user-content-ssh-using-a-manually-created-bastion-on-aws) 
```

# SSH access to an operational cluster node

The following describes four different approaches to get ssh access to a Kubernetes node.

> As a prerequisite to troubleshooting a Kubernetes node, the node must have joined the cluster successfully and is able to run a pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a prerequisite to troubleshooting a Kubernetes node, the node must have joined the cluster successfully and be able to run a pod.
```

All of the described approaches involve scheduling a pod with root permissions and mounting the root filesystem.

## Gardener Dashboard

**Prerequisite**: the terminal feature is configured for the Gardener dashboard.

Navigate to the cluster overview page and find the `Terminal` in the `Access` tile.

![f3ef5f0495992743d5d56d1f0adcd0ab.png](_resources/9fb6ca4ff9b7480f93debba833f48590.png)

Select the target Cluster (Garden, Seed / Control Plane, Shoot cluster) depending on the requirements and 
access rights (only certain users have access to the Seed Control Plane).

To open the terminal configuration, click on the top right-hand corner of the screen.

![de3ea5098e5b26e107e9880fe72ab863.png](_resources/db573582bfc544d294cbde8906a74e07.png)

Set the Terminal Runtime to "Privileged.
Also specify the target node from the drop-down menu.

> ![76f62f8c5c8f6031fab21463ed1d35d6.png](_resources/f7b10d48edf44c17ba838ff5c429e39d.png)

Reviewer: Any chance to crop the black belt at the right of the image?

In the default image used by the Dashboard, it is under `/hostroot`.
![0df1cc43eeafd164bfed1e47ea333487.png](_resources/3da659e9cc4744a2ad3e1c6a50d39c04.png)

## gardenctl shell

**Prerequisite**: `kubectl` and [gardenctl are available and configured](https://github.com/gardener/gardenctl).

First, target a Garden cluster containing all the Shoot definitions.

```
$ gardenctl target garden <target-garden>
```

Target an available Shoot by name. 
This sets up the context and configures the `kubeconfig` file of the Shoot cluster.
Subsequent commands will execute in this context.
```
$ gardenctl target shoot <target-shoot>
```

Get the nodes of the Shoot cluster.
```
$ gardenctl kubectl get nodes 
```

Pick a node name from the list above and get a root shell access to it.
```
$ gardenctl shell <target-node>
```

## Gardener Ops Toolbelt

**Prerequisite**: `kubectl` is available.

The [Gardener ops-toolbelt](https://github.com/gardener/ops-toolbelt) can be used as a convenient way to deploy a root pod to a node.
The pod uses an image that is bundled with a bunch of useful [troubleshooting tools](https://github.com/gardener/ops-toolbelt/tree/master/dockerfile-configs).

> This is also the same image that is used per default when using the Gardener Dashboard terminal feature as described in the [previous section](#gardener-dashboard).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is also the same image that is used by default when using the Gardener Dashboard terminal feature as described in the [previous section](#gardener-dashboard).
```

  containers:
  - name: busybox
    image: busybox
    stdin: true
    securityContext:
      privileged: true
    volumeMounts:
    - name: host-root-volume
      mountPath: /host
      readOnly: true
  volumes:
  - name: host-root-volume
    hostPath:
      path: /
  hostNetwork: true
  hostPID: true
  restartPolicy: Never
```

# SSH access to a node that failed to join the cluster

This section explores two options that can be used to get SSH access to a node that failed to join the cluster.
As it is not possible to schedule a pod on the node, the Kubernetes-based methods explored so far cannot be used in this scenario.

Additionally, Gardener typically provisions worker instances in a private subnet of the VPC, hence - there is no public IP address that could be used for direct SSH access.

For this scenario, cloud providers typically have extensive documentation (e.g [AWS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AccessingInstances.html) & [GCP](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instances/connecting-to-instance) 
and in [some cases tooling support](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instances/connecting-advanced#vpn)). 

> However, these approaches are mostly CloudProvider specific, require interaction via their CLI and API or sometimes 

Reviewer: Did you mean this or it's the resource name on purpose?
```suggestion
However, these approaches are mostly cloud provider specific, require interaction via their CLI and API or sometimes 
```

the installation of a [cloud provider specific agent](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/systems-manager/latest/userguide/sysman-install-ssm-agent.html) one the node.

Alternatively, `gardenctl` can be used providing a cloud provider agnostic and out-of-the-box support to get ssh access to an instance in a private subnet. 
Currently `gardenctl` supports AWS, GCP, Openstack, Azure and Alibaba Cloud.

## Identifying the problematic instance

> First, the problematic instance has to be identified. 
> In Gardener, worker pools can be created in different cloud provider regions, zones and accounts. 
> Identifying the problematic instance is the first stepping-stone. 

Reviewer: The first and last sentences in this paragraph sound redundant. My proposal is to remove the first.

```suggestion
In Gardener, worker pools can be created in different cloud provider regions, zones and accounts. 
Identifying the problematic instance is the first stepping-stone. 
```

```
$ kubectl get machine <machine-name> -o json | jq -r .spec.providerID // e.g aws:///eu-north-1/i-069733c435bdb4640
```
The identifier shows that the instance belongs to the cloud provider `aws` with the ec2 instance-id `i-069733c435bdb4640` in region `eu-north-1`.

To get more information about the instance, check out the `MachineClass` (e.g `AWSMachineClass`) that is associated with each `Machine` CRD in the `Shoot` namespace of the `Seed` cluster.
The `AWSMachineClass` contains the machine image ([ami](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AMIs.html)), machine-type, iam information, network-interfaces, subnets, security groups and attached volumes.

Of course, the information can also be used to get the instance with the cloud provider CLI / API.

## gardenctl ssh

Using the node name of the problematic instance, we can use the `gardenctl ssh` command to get SSH access to the cloud provider 
instance via an automatically set up [bastion host](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bastion_host).
`gardenctl` takes care of spinning up the `bastion` instance, setting up the SSH keys, ports and security groups and opens a root shell on the target instance.

> After the SSH session ended, `gardenctl` deletes the created cloud provider resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the SSH session has ended, `gardenctl` deletes the created cloud provider resources.
```

or "session ends"

Use the following commands:

First, target a Garden cluster containing all the Shoot definitions.
```
$ gardenctl target garden <target-garden>
```

Target an available Shoot by name. 
This sets up the context, configures the `kubeconfig` file of the Shoot cluster and downloads the cloud provider credentials.
Subsequent commands will execute in this context.

```
$ gardenctl target shoot <target-shoot>
```

This uses the cloud provider credentials to spin up the bastion and to open a shell on the target instance.
```
$ gardenctl ssh <target-node>
```

## SSH using a manually created Bastion on AWS

In case you are not using `gardenctl` or want to control the bastion instance yourself, you can also manually set it up. 

> The steps described here are generally [the same as `gardenctl` uses internally](https://github.com/gardener/gardenctl/blob/10a537942b94234914758c0f6d053dc1cf218ecd/pkg/cmd/ssh_aws.go#L53-L52).
> The details of setting up the bastion host is different from cloud provider to cloud provider. 
> It can be generalized into the following steps:

Reviewer: There are a few issues with redundancy and cohesion here. How about simplifying to this:

```suggestion
The steps described here are generally the same as [those used by `gardenctl` internally](https://github.com/gardener/gardenctl/blob/10a537942b94234914758c0f6d053dc1cf218ecd/pkg/cmd/ssh_aws.go#L53-L52).
Despite some cloud provider specifics they can be generalized to the following list: 
```

- Open port 22 on the target instance.
- Create an instance / VM in a public subnet (bastion instance needs to have public ip address).  
- Set-up security groups, roles and open port 22 for the bastion instance.

The following diagram shows an overview how the SSH access to the target instance works:

![520dc31009cf1d51e667551a5ae731e8.png](_resources/913441003e5641bc90249bdc07d55656.png)

This guide demonstrates the setup of a bastion on AWS.

**Prerequisites:**
- The `Aws CLI` is set up.
- Obtain target instance-id (see [here](#identifying-the-problematic-instance)).
- Obtain the VPC ID the Shoot resources are created in. This can be found in the `Infrastructure` CRD in the `Shoot` namespace in the `Seed`.
- Make sure that port 22 on the target instance is open (default for Gardener deployed instances).
    - Extract security group via `$ aws ec2 describe-instances --instance-ids <instance-id>`

>     - Check for rule that allows inbound connections on port 22 via `$ aws ec2 describe-security-groups --group-ids=<security-group-id>`

Reviewer: Prefer multi-line code snippets. When rendered in the documentation pages long code snippet single liners tend to overflow the page nastily. I haven't checked it locally, but please make sure it renders correctly or just use multi-line code  snippets to be on the safe site. Readers will also benefit from the one-click copy feature in this case. 

```suggestion
    - Check for rule that allows inbound connections on port 22 via 
      ```
      $ aws ec2 describe-security-groups --group-ids=<security-group-id>
      ```
```

See the other occurrences below too. I won't leave comments on each.
